So you say you all did watch it?
Absolutely.
We watched it there a couple times, and I'd watched it, I think, before that somehow.
It was one of the great patriotic movies.
Me and my dad was nagging.
I thought I wanted to go to A&M, so I think I watched it when it first came out before going to A&M.
Let's see.
Here in my notes, did you and your buddies ever go into the steam tunnels?
No, but I remember hearing something about it, but I didn't.
Some of them probably did, but I didn't.
Were you aware that there were some secret fraternities?
Yes, yeah.
But I didn't know any more about that because they never asked me to join.
Do you know how many there were?
I don't.
You know, when my dad were there, they had secret fraternities back then.
They called them the Bull Moose or something when he was there.
One of my friends, Eddie Thompson, was in one, and they got a big stink our senior year.
You know, what would surprise some people, and I was very, there's a reason behind everything.
I was very popular, very outgoing in high school, captain of the football team, president of the band, president of the thespians, et cetera, et cetera.
I ran for student council of Texas.
The people before me were elected.
Fort Stockton was going to be, their president would be president of student council of Texas.
I ran for that, and I was defeated.
But very narrowly.
It really hurt me deeply.
And so I said, well, that's it for politics.
I'm going to go get an education, and I'm not going to be involved in everything at school.
And I said, it's time for me to try to get some brains and don't worry about popularity.
So my focus at A&M was very different than it's been a lot of other times in my life.
I went, I had a purpose, and I didn't try out for Yale leader, any of those things.
I went to school.
And it was because of that event that happened earlier.
During your student days,
the most visible student leaders were, what positions?
Yale leaders, and probably Yale leaders, probably drum majors, well, Yale leaders, and then the
Probably the president of the... Senior?
Senior president and of course the Colonel of the Corps, the Corps leaders, you know, company commanders, those.
And outside of that, there was not a high social activity at A&M.
There was, but it wasn't like a lot of schools.
Maybe that's because we always left on the weekends, you know.
Did...
Tell me about freshman year bonfire for you.
Miserable.
Work.
How long?
Oh, I don't know.
It just went on and on forever.
Oh, really?
I remember how long, but I remember you out there raining on you, people hollering at you, and it was no fun at all.
And as a freshman, as a fish, did you all cut any or just haul?
We cut.
I think we just did hauling.
I don't think we did any cutting.
I think we did more just odds and ends labor, hauling the logs.
And we weren't much involved in putting up the bonfire either.
Where was it?
On drill field?
Bonfire was on the field, yeah, the drill field in front of MSC back then.
Yeah, and it was the whole time I was there.
Do you remember anybody getting hurt?
No, but they probably did.
And this was not during the time when the Longhorns tried to bomb?
Yes, it was the time.
Oh, really?
Yeah, they came over, maybe it was a year before.
But yeah, they came over in the airplane and tried to light the fire.
That was part of it trying, you know, that was just good BS.
Like trying to steal a baler bear, light their fire, they'd light up.
See if you could sneak in and get their fire going prematurely.
You had to have guards.
I remember guarding the bonfire zone and some of that.
What about muster?
Do you remember going to muster?
Yeah, muster was always very emotional.
But I think it became more emotional after you graduated, much more, as you knew so-and-so was killed in Korea.
You start mentioning his name.
And then maybe one of you, in the early days, you know, all of our peers were in the Air Force.
There'd be plane crashes killed in combat.
So you'd read in the Aggie, so you'd know.
Up to this, you know, you know who was killed in action, which in my early days we had a lot of that.
Later then, you know, as your classmates get older and they die, so muster's always, always been very emotional to all Aggies.
Did your dad ever say anything about muster or bonfire in his days?
The muster was really just cranking off in 15.
It wasn't the...
Like, really, the muster, the Corregidor muster, as we all know, was the great, and that put the muster, you know, like that was the next step up.
Yes, you're correct.
I think that my dad, actually, he probably had his, he went back to Paris when they formed the American Legion after World War I. But his allegiance was more to the first officers that he went through combat with, that he went into the service with, more than A&M.
But A&M was still just building in 1950.
What was it?
11 years of this century and a few of the last.
I mean, they were still really a pretty new school when he was there.
So the Corregidor Mustard Knows started and you get just like the former students.
Look what it's done in the last 20 years compared to the years before that.
It's like the magazine didn't get started until 30 years ago or something like that.
And I'm predicting that
bonfire tragedy a year and a half ago in which 12 people died, 12th man, I'm guessing that in a few years that will become an important part.
It absolutely will.
It won't be a few years, it'll be quickly.
Like I did the muster in Albuquerque 2000.
Yeah.
And the squad leader
of the group of the squad in which the last two victims were members, he and his family live in Albuquerque, and he had the flag that was hanging out there on the pile that night.
And so instead of lighting a candle for every person whose name they called,
We let 12 candles and they were put
in a shape like this.
Like a bonfire, yeah.
There'd be great tradition to grow out of that.
And, you know, that probably could have happened years before.
I think it was poorly managed by the seniors, and it's a shame we lost lives.
But they'll build, there'll be a re-engineered bonfire, they'll have time, and it'll become a great tradition.
It'll all work out all right.
Now, in your era, you all were cutting down the trees with axes.
Axes, and there were some big saws.
Oh, big saws.
Yeah.
But no power saws.
No, they didn't have them then.
I hate to admit I'm that damn old, but they didn't have power saws then.
And nothing was put on bonfire except the trunks of the trees.
The trunks of the trees.
No trash.
No, no trash.
Trunks of the trees and the outhouse.
That outhouse has been on there forever, I think.
As far as you know, it was a real outhouse that came from somebody's private property.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, I think so.
I've learned in the 20s that what happened quite often is the outhouse owner went to the campus and told them that he'd like to donate his, and in return they would give him a new outhouse, which was better.
Oh, I didn't know that.
Yeah, I think they were real outhouses.
You know, I don't know that.
That was my thought.
When you're a freshman down there, things are going on and, you know, you're so involved in trying to survive that there's a lot of things that I didn't know all was going on.
You know, really knew very little ago.
What about Silver Taps?
Yeah.
Silver Taps was a smaller enough end, very, very, very emotional.
We'd fall out when somebody was killed.
We'd fall out that day, whenever it was, you know, two or three days after they were killed, walk silently to the administration building to place Silver Taps, go back and go to bed.
And never say a word.
Back in the 70s.
Now they have so many that they have to combine them.
But it was right at CQ when you were through, called a quarter, then you were through, that happened then.
So it took about 45 minutes to walk over.
then have a silver tap and then come back.
Most people just, I'd generally go to bed then.
Did everybody take it seriously?
Oh yeah, it was serious.
See, now it's okay to go back and turn your lights on.
Well, there may have been some lights on, but it was so emotional then.
And all military, we had to go.
So you had a big crowd.
Where today, it's voluntary, except for the military.
It was emotional.
The time you get back, it's 11.30 or something like that.
And mostly, you just maybe wash your face something and go to bed.
In the early 70s when I was dean of faculties, a student group came to me for advice and an Aggie student who had been involved in a burglary in Brenham was driving too fast to try to get away and was killed in the wreck.
And the big question was, do they have silver taps or not?
And they came to me and said, please give us advice.
And I said, well, since I didn't go to Texas A&M, I've only been here 20 years working here.
It's not appropriate for me to give you advice except to say, you all decide, was this student an Aggie or not?
Yeah.
If that student's an Aggie, isn't that the question?
Yeah, yeah.
And they, if I'm not mistaken, they decide yes.
I think they had to have it.
They didn't have to be proud of him.
Right, right.
I think they had to have it.
How could they not?
Let's see.
First, do you remember the first final review your freshman year?
Yeah, but it didn't hit me.
It's your last final review that hits you.
Oh, really?
Make believe I wouldn't understand that.
Why is final review important?
It's the end, you know, and it's that there's a, the deep love comes out.
I've got a picture probably here of me with a final review because I didn't, I was always very distressed that I didn't go ahead and stay and get a commission.
And so I have a picture of me in a blue shirt with all my outfit.
I went to join them after review.
It was a sense, you know, there's things in your life that are failure,
that you try to overcome later on like the Napoleon complex if you're short or something.
And that's probably one of the reasons that I've been more of a noisy Aggies because I had some regrets of things I didn't do when I was there.
I think that's pretty much human nature.
So you didn't have senior boots?
No, I didn't have senior boots.
Because I was going to ask, how much did they cost and where did you get them?
Commencement.
Where was commencement held?
Commencement was in Raleigh White.
Okay.
And describe people who came.
Commencement, well, they mail them.
I didn't graduate because I told you I laid out one semester, so I finished the summer semester six weeks more.
And so I had to mail mine.
You know, the commencement wasn't the deal.
the final review was the deal.
Commencement, the degree was secondary, the final review of the military, that was what was the deal.
As you look back on all those years, if all the faculty and staff
from your time could be present, which ones would you most want to thank and for why would you want to thank them?
Well, Kunkel would be number one because he brought so much excitement to learning.
The guy Fish, the English teacher who brought me out into debates and stuff like that.
Here's an ag kid that he helped me with a little different direction.
I think the top, Harrington was important as a symbol.
That's the president, you know.
Then I'd thank some of the juniors and seniors when I was, could have gotten kicked out because I was used to being wild and free and here I'm confined.
And the seniors are my outfit.
But, you know, we just didn't have any bad professors at that time.
And I think one difference, at least that I saw when I was teaching down there, the professors in that time were really totally dedicated to teaching.
And they weren't worried about research or my career, that stuff.
And so it was a little bit like my Fort Stockton High School.
They nurtured us.
I mean, when they got through culling,
When the kids that couldn't make it, when they got through that, they nurtured, like Pappy Potts, for example.
I'd thank him for sure.
They nurtured us.
A lot of those great, great guys, not many women there, nearly all men, they were such a part of the system of our whole event, and they cared about us.
They truly did.
I'd want to thank every darn one of them, but some opened my eyes to some things.
We were so fortunate.
to have the leadership and the teacher, the teacher, not professor, teachers.
They taught us.
What contributes to this great pride that so many people have in the school?
I've got a gift from my daughter, my future daughter-in-law, who's in ag here, will be, will graduate.
She says, those inside can't explain it and those outside can't understand it.
There's a little plaque on that.
I thought it was pretty good.
Initially, I'm pretty sure it's the sense of achievement that we went through something tough.
And we made it.
I saw a spirit like that.
I was waiting tables in mineral wells after hours in the Army in the Lost Battalion.
came there they were conquered and you probably know that and there was a spirit that they had that those men had that was very similar to what A&M men had that they had been through a very difficult situation it made them it made the freshmen it cleaves you together when everybody else is your enemy the juniors are the seniors the sophomores everybody's your enemy you're all you got your old lady and so that's number one
You cleave together in difficult times.
No matter where mankind faces difficult times, you have to fight the enemy.
Second, then, that you made it.
And you know that you went through difficult stuff, and three out of four didn't make it.
So enters the pride.
This is in the early formative days, where the pride then starts the tradition.
And then you have the Medal of Honor with it.
It all ties basically to the military.
I'm the first to say I wasn't a military guy, but it's very clear to me that the military is the reason that we have the school we do at A&M.
The military, the tradition, the heroes, the corregidor muster, the climbing the cliffs at France, pointing to the hock, and so all these things keep building and you start building tradition like King Gill and just the whole thing.
Then here's the core, that's the C-O-R-E.
The nucleus of our spirit comes from the military.
Now, it's that big, and the school is this big.
But the students have grabbed in, the outside students that are not in the military, don't plan a career, they have picked up those traditions.
And the spirit is still, that's the revolver around the Corps of Cadets.
And there's still a heartbeat of A&M.
My band's a heartbeat, but the Corps is a key.
And somehow, I've been so proud of everybody there in that.
We've been able to grow into a very large university and have most of the spirit.
Now, my son will never have the spirit I do because he wasn't in the military.
He didn't go through what I went through.
But he's got a lot of it.
Probably got as much as he could have, not actually going through and living through the freshman, sophomore years.
I enjoy telling after the machine was turned off with Bill Clayton.
Yeah.
We're talking about co-education, not combinator core and all that, and he said that those proposals came up during his first term in the legislature.
He said, I didn't speak up, didn't say anything, but I was really opposed to them.
I want to.
And I said, well, I'm interested.
Why were you opposed to them?
And he said, I thought they'd kill the spirit, particularly the women.
Yep.
I said, you're kidding.
And he said, no.
Do the women have spirit?
I said, sir, as far as I can tell, the A&M women today may have more spirits.
May have probably more.
And he hit the table and said, good, because my three granddaughters are all there.
That's right.
And I was against it when it was going on.
Of course, at a distance, well, there weren't any girls there, you shouldn't have any now.
Two daughters at A&M graduating.
So, yeah.
But we didn't see it, and we didn't say, well, we couldn't understand.
It took somebody like Earl Rudder to lead us through that period of time
Because he recognized there weren't going to be enough commissions.
The military didn't have a future.
And he was, with his heroic background, was able to push it through where a lot of people couldn't have put that through because we were against it.
I mean, we were 90% against it.
So see, what do we know?
I asked Ed Cooper, who was it, how was it, where was it that apparently got Mr. Rudder really committed to it?
He said, I've been working on that one for about 30 years, and I think I got the pieces and the jigsaw puzzle together.
He said, I think it happened at a bed and breakfast.
I said, what?
He said, maybe at 2 in the morning after two old friends had shared a cool beverage when the President of the United States at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue put his arm around the former mayor of Brady, Texas,
who had led that president's 1948 Senate campaign in the Hill Country counties.
He said, apparently LBJ, on one of Mr. Rudder's trips to Washington, said, Earl, if you expect to keep coming up here to Washington and getting lots of money out of the federal government, you're going to have to get A&M moving because it's standing still and other schools are passing you by.
You don't have a choice in integration.
The courts have decided that.
Yeah, yeah.
Now, who knows what about women?
They may decide that, too.
Now, I'll back you.
Tiger, your classmate, he'll back you.
Yeah, yeah.
John Conley and Nele and your wife were classmates at the University of Texas all four years and were in student government together.
He'll back you.
Jake Pickle and you have known each other since you were eighth graders.
Yeah.
Well, and you and I know that John Lindsay and others and the former students, and come on, Earl, get it done.
Yeah, I'll be back.
And I agree with you.
Only Mr. Rudder could.
Yeah, he probably could.
Lennon himself couldn't have done it, we'd have gone the other way.
That's right.
Yeah, Earl could have, yeah.
But it had to happen, and it was surprising to me that many of us were so hard-headed and so short-sighted at the time.
What are the events in an Aggie's experience that contribute most to this Aggie spirit?
I think I'd call it event rather than plural.
I think going through those difficult times together.
I'm talking about my spirit.
Going through the difficult times together.
And actually, it is very much now centered around the football team.
Very much.
I mean, not just the way it is.
A lot of folks don't like it, but our Aggie spirit.
I made pep talks when Jackie Sherrill was there to the team.
Every tough game, and what I tried to put forward, that our love for A&M as former students, once we're out, is expressed mostly through football.
It's not basketball.
It's not track.
It's not baseball.
It's through the football, the parade, the march in, the event, the band, the half.
And that's where we express that Aggie spirit.
Looking back on your student years, what did you learn at Texas A&M that's been important to you in all the years since then?
There's two things probably.
The first I learned as a sophomore in military science.
And they took a string and put it on the desk, a soft cotton string.
They said, Williams, push this string to the other side of the desk.
Well, it's hard to push because it wads up.
You can't push across well.
Now, Williams, pull that string across.
Leadership.
So as I built pipelines or done things, or worked cattle,
I never asked my men to do anything I don't do.
That's the military leadership training, leadership.
The other is just basically an educational formula that I learned to organize.
I learned to organize my work, to work, to organize, to understand the growing of a mind that happened there.
Those two things in my case.
And probably what plays the best in the history is that string.
And every time I speak to the Corps, any group down there, I'll always use the string.
Well, that's true leadership.
And the military has to have it.
Aggie ring.
You remember when you bought your first one?
Yeah, I do.
It was somebody else's ring.
Because I was a semester behind.
You remember out there?
I missed that semester.
All right, all the rest of my group is going to graduate, and I don't have a ring yet.
So I got another guy to order me a ring so I could wear a ring.
Later, I don't wear a ring today because I can't wear anything brass.
It just drives me nuts.
And that's maybe another reason because I can't have my Aggie ring.
I want people to know damn sure I'm an Aggie because the ring, I can't wear it.
So I've accomplished that.
Aggie flag out there.
How did you feel when you first put that ring on there?
Oh, good as hell.
Even though it wasn't mine yet, I'd earned it and I knew it would.
Do you have any ring stories about you lost it?
Yeah, I got in a fight one time.
I took it off because I didn't want to hit the guy with my ring.
I don't know why.
I should have gone ahead and hit him with the ring.
I'd done more damage.
And I lost it there.
So I've ordered two or three now.
And have you ever been somewhere as a stranger and somebody spotted it?
Oh, always.
Well, always because I don't wear a ring.
I just can't wear it.
But I'm always looking.
You'll rarely see an Aggie that I don't see his ring.
And mostly they know I'm an Aggie, so they put it out there where I can see it.
We Aggies do that.
We're proud of it.
We're proud of being an Aggie and achieving what it took to get there.
In doing an interview with Dr. Bowen not long ago, that question, he said that after he graduated, he went to Caltech, and then he goes to Europe for three months in the summer, and he's on the train going from Vienna
Yeah.
And this, he thought, old lady was seated across from him on the train, and she looks at him, he's reading the newspaper, looks at him and said, is that an Aggie ring?
And he said, well, yes, ma'am, how would you know?
You know, how do you recognize an Aggie ring?
And she introduced herself, her husband's name was H.B.
Zachary.
I mean, they would know for sure.
Wouldn't they?
What a great Aggie family that was, too.
Yes, yes, yes.
Well, what have we, what have we, oh, what advice, you're now a consultant, what advice would you give to the leaders of Texas A&M today?
Well, that's the whole book.
Seriously.
I'm unendingly concerned about the academia against A&M.
The Faculty Senate in some cases, in other words, the direction that they'd like to take A&M and the liberal direction they'd like to take it and make it what it's not.
And I think our balance first is the former students to try to keep the A&M we have.
Now, it's been a lot of changes.
Most have been good.
So I'm concerned about that.
I'm concerned about number two, what is the purpose of Texas A&M?
What's its objective?
In my business, what's my goal?
What am I trying to do here?
What should its goal be?
Its goal should be teaching Texas kids, not furthering careers.
I have very little concern about how many Nobel laureates that we have that you can put on and try to get some ranking somewhere.
I'm different than some people, but I think most Aggies agree with me.
What's the basic purpose?
And the purpose is to teach Texas kids like I was taught, not to further a career.
And I was six years there, going to the, you know the world I'm talking about, and I've never seen so much jealousy.
As academia puts out, I was very disappointed in that.
And I haven't seen as much nurturing of the kids compared to, I'm a professional teacher, next year I'm going to move to so-and-so, move to so-and-so there.
And that's what we had.
So an Aggie like me, I'd like the kids of today to have what I had.
It's probably unrealistic.
But I see that as somewhat of a flaw.
I see the third.
I've had so many of my children's kids come and say, in my lecture, it's some Korean guy who said, I don't understand what he's taking.
So I'm taking math at Blinn and some of those things.
And I see that's down the line.
But I could go on a good while.
How large should the enrollment be at A&M?
I think it's got to grow.
Bigger than the 43,000?
Yes.
And the reason I think so is that the opportunity that we Aggies are so proud of, and we're so proud of being Aggies, should be offered to as many as we could.
And why not have it there rather than at sub-colleges where they could feel like they're really Aggies instead of not being Aggies at Canyon or Kingsville or somewhere like that?
So there's a number of things.
I think there's probably what it takes to have a winning football team is more important than academia thinks because that's where we express our love for A&M.
That's a fair start, how much more you want.
As much as you want to share.
Yeah.
I think those are very critical things.
And so you get down to some points, and this has to be involved and settled almost politically, but what do you want A&M to be?
What does A&M to be?
We have this deal 2000, and they asked me to be on.
I agreed to it, and then there was nothing about the Corps.
I said, well, I'm dropping off of this until you can say that the Corps is important to A&M.
If you want my name and my money, then I'm not going to subscribe to the 2020 as it's here.
And I haven't heard any more from them.
I probably will.
But I think they're wrong.
I think the Corps needs to be, if we're going to have that Corps, C-O-R-E,
You've got to continue to nurture that core because it's not fun.
It's tough, and you've got to do things to keep that going.
It needs support from academia as well.
uh i've got only one more question that i can think of can you i've got this one guy waiting then i can come back all right well i'm not in a hurry oh okay what i've got is a sheriff we're giving them some armored vests for a couple of guys we're gonna get our picture made and why don't you let me go do that all right or if you just have one more we could all right i've got time
Then the last question is, what feelings do you carry in your heart for Texas A&M?
Well, maybe I can best describe those that every time they play the Aggie spirit, I cry.
And like most Aggies, you got kids there.
It's a continuity that we're all proud of.
It's a lineage back from my dad to me to my kids.
Gosh, we've got some that have been five generations now, I guess, you know.
It goes back to the whole, the whole.
The core, the new kids, the whole thing to make a whole.
And maybe best illustrated by the attitude of the state toward A&M at the tragedy of the bonfire.
More importantly, how the A&M kids handled that.
I just have never been more proud of A&M outside of the combat heroes or something than how they handled the bonfire, how the kids, the university has all handled.
And not a lawsuit yet.
Now that's unbelievable.
That's a statement that probably, and of course they said, my kid died there.
Damned if I'm going to have some lawyer trying to get money out of what he gave his life for.
But I'll bet you that wouldn't have happened at lots of other schools.
So how do you define that?
How do you?
I don't know.
But that's the spirit, and it goes back to the core in the middle.
Well, let's see.
Now that caused me then to think of another question.
In all of your Aggie experiences, what are the proudest moments?
Distinguished alumni.
Yeah, I think so, without question.
Yeah, without question.
But I've enjoyed so many proud moments.